Maintenance Windows (#383)
uyuni-project/uyuni-docs: modules/administration/pages/maintenance-windows.adoc

[[maintenance-windows]]
= Maintenance Windows

The maintenance windows feature in {productname} allows you to schedule actions to occur during a scheduled maintenance window period.

> When you have assigned a maintenance window to a client, the client is prevented from executing some actions outside of the specified period.

Author: OK, that makes a lot of sense. I've reworded again, LMK.

.Procedure: Scheduling a Package Upgrade
. In the {productname} {webui}, navigate to menu:Systems[System List], select the client you want to upgrade, and go to the menu:Software[Packages > Upgrade] tab.
. Select the package to upgrade from the list, and click btn:[Upgrade Package].
. In the [guimenu]``Maintenance Window`` field, select which maintenance window the client should use to perform the upgrade.

== Create Multiple Maintenance Schedules

When you create a calendar, it contains a number of events, which can be either one-time events, or recurring events.
Each event contains a ``summary`` field.
If you want to create multiple maintenance windows for one calendar, you can specify events for each using the ``summary`` field.

For example, you might like to create a schedule for production servers, and a different schedule for testing servers.
In this case, you would specify ``SUMMARY: Production Servers`` on events for the production servers, and ``SUMMARY: Testing Servers`` on events for the testing servers.

image::maint_windows_multi.png[scaledwidth=80%]

There are two types of schedule: single, or multi.

> If your calendar contains events that apply to more than one schedule, then you must select ``multi``, and ensure you name the schedule according to the ``summary`` field you used in the calendar file.

Author: Yeah, so this was my thinking for those three paras:

1: Defines calendar events, introduces the `summary` field.
2: Example of use of the `summary` field
IMAGE
3: Discusses using this in practice

I think if we move para 3 up to be para 1 or 2, it tells you how to do something before you have a clear idea of what the thing is.

> .Procedure: Creating Multiple Schedules

Author: Yeah, I was kind of hoping I could sub in "multiple" for "multi" because I have a pathological aversion to abbreviations :joy:

====

Maintenance windows require both a calendar, and a schedule.
The calendar defines the date and time of your maintenance window events, including recurring events, and must be in [path]``ical`` format.
The schedule uses the events defined in the calendar to create the maintenance windows.
You must create an [path]``ical`` file for upload, or link to an [path]``ical`` file to create the calendar, before you can create the schedule.

When you have created the schedule, you can assign it to clients that are registered to the {productname} Server.
Clients that have a maintenance schedule assigned cannot run restricted actions outside of maintenance windows.

Restricted actions significantly modify the client, and could potentially cause the client to stop running.
Some examples of restricted actions are:

* Package installation
* Client upgrade
* Service pack migration
* Highstate application (for Salt clients)

Unrestricted actions are minor actions that are considered safe and are unlikely to cause problems on the client.
Some examples of unrestricted actions are:

* Package profile update
* Hardware refresh

> * Subscribing to software channels

Reviewer: Should we add a complete list of action which are restricted and which not?
AFAIK Pau wanted to have it.

Author: So @hustodemon and I thought that because the list is quite long, we would need to add it at the end of the section or something, rather than here. Happy to do that, if @paususe wants it.

Reviewer 2: I can give you the list. @paususe do you want to have the full list?

Reviewer 3: Yes please, full list.

Author: OK. I'll need that list then, please @hustodemon :slightly_smiling_face:

Reviewer: @Loquacity I made a list of actions which can only be executed when a client is in maintenance mode (in a maintenance window). I tried to make the list understanable by humans and grouped things togther . We will see if it is correct enough.

* package operations (install/update/remove)
* patch update
* reboot
* config management changing tasks
* State Highstate
* autoinstallation (reinstall)
* remote command
* SP Migration
* Cluster operations

Author: lol, I thought the list was long? :joy:

Before you begin, you must create an [path]``ical`` file for upload, or link to an [path]``ical`` file to create the calendar.

> You can create [path]``ical`` files in your preferred calendaring tool, such as KOrganizer.

Reviewer: Korganizer is not the best example here. Should we better name outlook/office365 and google calendar?

Author: I was going for open source, but sure :)

Reviewer: Yes, but customers using not open source clients :-(
So we designed this to work with outlook calendars and also tried google as most people will have it.
I would still name KOrganizer, but also the other.

Reviewer 3: Agree with MC's comment. As much as I like KOrganizer (former KDE developer here!), it's not that popular. I would rewrite naming the most popular e-mail clients:
"... such as Microsoft Outlook, Google Calendar or Mozilla Thunderbird"

* Hardware refresh
* Subscribing to software channels

Before you begin, you must create an [path]``ical`` file for upload, or link to an [path]``ical`` file to create the calendar.
You can create [path]``ical`` files in your preferred calendaring tool, such as Microsoft Outlook, Google Calendar, or KOrganizer.

.Procedure: Uploading a New Maintenance Calendar
. In the {productname} {webui}, navigate to menu:Schedule[Maintenance Windows > Calendars], and click btn:[Create].
. In the [guimenu]``Calendar Name`` section, type a name for your calendar.
. Either provide a URL to your [path]``ical`` file, or upload the file directly.
. Click btn:[Create Calendar] to save your calendar.

.Procedure: Creating a New Schedule
. In the {productname} {webui}, navigate to menu:Schedule[Maintenance Windows > Schedules], and click btn:[Create].
. In the [guimenu]``Schedule Name`` section, type a name for your schedule.
. OPTIONAL: If your [path]``ical`` file contains events that apply to more than one schedule, check [guimenu]``Multi``.
. Select the calendar to assign to this schedule.
. Click btn:[Create Schedule] to save your schedule.

.Procedure: Assigning a Schedule to a Client

> . In the {productname} {webui}, navigate to menu:Systems[Systems List], select the client to be assigned to a schedule, locate the [guimenu]``System Properties`` panel and click btn:[Edit These Properties].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
. In the {productname} {webui}, navigate to menu:Systems[Systems List], select the client to be assigned to a schedule, locate the [guimenu]``System Properties`` panel, and click btn:[Edit These Properties].
```

Alternatively, you can assign clients through the system set manager by navigating to menu:Systems[System Set Manager] and using the menu:Misc[Maintenance Windows] tab.
. In the [guimenu]``Edit System Details`` page, locate the [guimenu]``Maintenance Schedule`` field, and select the name of the schedule to be assigned.
. Click btn:[Update Properties] to assign the maintenance schedule.

[NOTE]
====
When you assign a new maintenance schedule to a client, it is possible that the client might already have some restricted actions scheduled, and that these might now conflict with the new maintenance schedule.
If this occurs, the {webui} will display an error and you will not be able to assign the schedule to the client.
To resolve this, check the btn:[Cancel affected actions] option when you assign the schedule.
This will cancel any previously scheduled actions that conflict with the new maintenance schedule.
====

> When you have created your maintenance windows, you can schedule restricted actions, such as package upgrades, to be performed during the maintenance window.

Reviewer 2: Just me feeling (feel free to ignore): I'm a bit tentative about the  "When you have created your maintenance windows"  phrase, could we use someting like "Now you can schedule restricted actions, such as package upgrades, to be performed during the maintenance window."?

Author: The only problem that I have with your suggestion is that we're assuming the reader knows what "now" refers to. We know that readers jump around documentation, so we can't assume they have both read the entire preceding content and performed all the preceding steps. By using the "when you ... you can" construction (which is becoming standard in our docs), we're giving some more signposts for the reader. I appreciate that it can sound a little clunky when you've read the whole thing though :wink:

Ensure it matches the ``summary`` field of the calendar.
. Check the [guimenu]``Multi`` option.
. Select the calendar to assign to this schedule.
. Click btn:[Create Schedule] to save your schedule.
. To create the next schedule, click btn:[Create].
. In the [guimenu]``Schedule Name`` section, type the name for your second schedule.
Ensure it matches the ``summary`` field of the second calendar.
. Check the [guimenu]``Multi`` option.
. Click btn:[Create Schedule] to save your schedule.
. Repeat for each schedule you need to create.

== Restricted and Unrestricted Actions

This sections contains a complete list of restricted and unrestricted actions.

Restricted actions significantly modify the client, and could potentially cause the client to stop running.
Restricted actions can only be run during a maintenance window.
The restricted actions are:

* Package operations (for example, installing, updating, or removing packages)
* Patch updates
* Rebooting a client
* Rolling back transactions
* Configuration management changing tasks
* Applying a highstate (for Salt clients)
* Autoinstallation and reinstallation

> * Remote commands

Reviewer: Maybe we should add a special note about remote command and salt.
We restrict only `actions` which can be scheduled. 

But for salt clients we have an additional page where you can run remote commands for it.
Salt => Remote Command  - here you can run a command directly. This works also for clients which are not in maintenance mode.

[[maintenance-windows]]
= Maintenance Windows

The maintenance windows feature in {productname} allows you to schedule actions to occur during your maintenance window period ahead of time, and to create repeating tasks.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think that it'd be good, if we clarified, what the terms *Calendar* and *Schedule* are. These are some facts that should describe them:

- *Calendar* is basically an [iCalendar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ICalendar) file imported to SUMA
- *Schedule* uses events defined in *Calendar* to define/generate maintenance windows
- *Schedule* can be assigned to *System*s
- A *System* with assigned *Schedule* can't run "restricted" action outside of maintenance windows
- Restricted actions are actions, that modify the system significantly (and could potentially break it) - e.g. package installation, upgrade, service pack migration, highstate application. Unrestricted actions are fairly safe actions - e.g. package profile update, hardware refresh, subscribing to software channels.

![diagram-schedule-1](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1412268/87919495-2989bb80-ca78-11ea-8114-414054585a1e.png)

.Procedure: Creating a New Maintenance Calendar
. Step the first
. ...
. Final step

.Procedure: Creating a New Schedule
. Step the first
. ...
. Final step

> .Procedure: Performing a Maintenance Update

Reviewer 2: As a 3rd step, I'd say we should tell the user to assign the *Schedule* to a *System*(or *System*s). When the user does this, it means that they can't schedule the "restricted" actions anytime, but only inside of the maintenance windows defined by the *Schedule* (and *Calendar*).

As a 4th step, we could tell them to perform a package upgrade (any other "restricted" action would do, but I think a package upgrade is a good example) inside of maintenance window. The user just go to the UI for package upgrade (`System details -> Software -> Packages -> Upgrade`), selects the package(s) to upgrade and then selects the maintenance window from the UI.
(I'd also avoid the term *maintenance update*, since this is something that users have associated with the SUMA releases. The more precise caption would be "Performing a Package Upgrade inside a Maintenance Window).

[[maintenance-windows]]
= Maintenance Windows

The maintenance windows feature in {productname} allows you to schedule actions to occur during a scheduled maintenance window period.
Maintenance windows can be scheduled to suit your calendar.

> When you have created a schedule, you can select tasks that can only be performed during a scheduled maintenance window.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I completely understand this sentence, but I think it describes the fact, that the feature restricts action execution to the maintenance windows (and does not allow executing some types of actions outside of them). I think it's important to describe this "restrictiveness" of the maintenance windows, but I find it a bit confusing.

Could we maybe merge this to the first sentence of the paragraph and rephrase to roughly something like this:

The maintenance windows feature in {productname} allows you to schedule actions to occur during a scheduled maintenance window period, and prevents you from executing actions outside of these periods.

Maintenance windows require both a calendar, and a schedule.
The calendar defines the date and time of your maintenance window events, including recurring events, and must be in [path]``ical`` format.
The schedule uses the events defined in the calendar to create the maintenance windows.

> You must create an [path]``ical`` file for upload, or link to an [path]``ical`` file to create the calendar, before you can create the schedule.

Author: added a new section to handle multi.

When you have created the schedule, you can assign it to clients that are registered to the {productname} Server.
Clients that have a maintenance window assigned cannot run restricted actions outside of the scheduled maintenance window.

Restricted actions significantly modify the client, and could potentially cause the client to stop running.
Restricted actions include:

* Package installation
* Client upgrade
* Service pack migration
* Highstate application (for Salt clients)

Unrestricted actions are minor actions that are considered safe and are unlikely to cause problems on the client.
Unrestricted actions include:

* Package profile update
* Hardware refresh

> * Subscribing to software channels

Author: Let's leave it out for now. If we get a customer request we can add it in later on.

Before you begin, you must create an [path]``ical`` file for upload, or link to an [path]``ical`` file to create the calendar.
You can create [path]``ical`` files in your preferred calendaring tool, such as KOrganizer.

> // I don't know if this is correct. ---LKB 2020-07-21

Reviewer 2: That sounds good.

Author: sometimes my guesses turn out ok! :tada:

.Procedure: Creating a New Maintenance Calendar
. In the {productname} {webui}, navigate to menu:Schedule[Maintenance Windows > Calendar], and click btn:[Create].
. In the [guimenu]``Calendar Name`` section, type a name for your calendar.
. Either provide a URL to your [path]``ical`` file, or upload the file directly.

> . Click btn:[Create Schedule] to save your calendar.

Reviewer 2: Hm, I think the button says `Create Calendar` (could be that an incorrect version was deployed on the test server).

![ss-cal](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1412268/88047796-7641c500-cb52-11ea-977a-d6f38615da04.png)

Author: That came from a video, I haven't tested much yet. Will come back to this.

Author: FYI: the test server is showing 404 as of 2020-07-22 17:00 UTC. Will have to come back to testing later.

Author: Still 404 at 2020-07-23 0600 UTC

Reviewer 2: Ouch! Working on it now.

Reviewer 2: (anyway, the correct button is `Create Calendar`, so we should put this one to the docs. if you discover, it says `Create Schedule` in some future version of uyuni, then it's a bug and (i will eat my hat))

// Well, that;s confusing :\ -- LKB 2020-07-21

.Procedure: Creating a New Schedule
. In the {productname} {webui}, navigate to menu:Schedule[Maintenance Windows > Calendar], and click btn:[Create].
. In the [guimenu]``Schedule Name`` section, type a name for your schedule.

> . OPTIONAL: If your [path]``ical`` file contains more than one calendar, and you want to schedule all of the calendars, check [guimenu]``Multi``.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if "if your file contains more than one calendar" is fitting here, ical file contains events, not calendars. I'd suggest to rephrase in something like: "single" schedule uses all events defined in the calendar to define maintenance windows, "multi" schedule uses only  events, that have their *summary* equal to the schedule name (see the example picture above).

Author: Yep, added a new section to handle this. So in this version I'll just have a one-line 'optional' and then a proper explanation and procedure later on.

. Select the calendar to assign to this schedule.
. Click btn:[Update Schedule] to save your schedule.

.Procedure: Assigning a Schedule to a Client
. In the {productname} {webui}, navigate to menu:Systems[Systems List], select the client to be assigned to a schedule, locate the [guimenu]``Properties`` panel and click btn:[Edit These Properties].

> Alternatively, you can assign clients through the system set manager.

Reviewer 2: Maybe I'd elaborate on the place of the feature in the SSM (it's a bit hidden there): it's in `<go to ssm> -> Misc -> Maintenance Windows`.

. In the [guimenu]``Edit System Details`` page, locate the [guimenu]``Maintenance Schedule`` field, and select the name of the schedule to be assigned.
. Click btn:[Update Properties] to assign the maintenance schedule.

> . OPTIONAL: To remove a maintenance schedule, check the btn:[Cancel affected actions] option.

Reviewer 2: The "cancel affected actions" function can be used in situations, when you have some (restricted) actions for a system that are scheduled for the future and you want to assign a schedule to that system. 

Let's consider this example:
- you have a system that is not assigned to any maint. schedules
- you schedule a highstate application to happen in the future, e.g. `2020-12-12 10:00 (Saturday)`
- now you want to assign a maintenance schedule to this system, but the maintenance schedule only contains windows on weekdays
- obviously, the schedule is not compatible with the existing scheduled action (highstate application), so if you check "cancel affected actions", SUMA will cancel the scheduled highstate execution of that highstate upon assigning the schedule
- (otoh, if you leave that unchecked and you assign that schedule, SUMA will report a warning, that assigning that schedule is not allowed)

Therefore I'd rephrase into something like this:
```suggestion
. OPTIONAL: Checking the btn:[Cancel affected actions] cancels already scheduled actions that collide with the maintenance schedule.
```

Author: Ah, that makes sense now! I've added this into an admonition below the procedure.
